VR Breakout (Working Title)
A VR Game Prototype By
Quinn Owens

I. Introduction

	Virtual Reality games tend to be very niche and a challenging type of game to design.  Without a screen, a heads-up-display isn’t as possible as it is with traditional games and one needs to account for a player’s body position when it comes to gameplay elements, so they don’t phase into walls and the game’s mechanics work as intended.  There is also the problem of motion sickness for many while in virtual reality, which can make many game concepts unviable.  On the flip-side, being fully immersed in a virtual environment with audio and visual sensors, as well as the player having a full range of motion, opens a lot of avenues for many different types of games.  As a result, it is my opinion that games need to be exclusively designed for virtual reality, taking into account these limitations and using the freedoms of virtual reality to their fullest extent.
	This project will be my first foray into this school of thought, mainly using my experience from the first two assignments we did in this class.  The goal of this project will be to make a fully functional VR game in which the player plays a 3D version of Breakout, specifically built for virtual reality.  The game, if you’re unfamiliar with Breakout, is about bouncing a ball off of a platform to bounce it off of bricks as many times as possible, destroying them and earning points for doing so, in order to earn a high score.
	As a side note, this type of game could also pave the way for an arcade setup that doesn’t need a head-mounted display and hand controllers, as well as for asymmetric multiplayer games (in which this design could be easily implemented into, for example, a goalie position for a virtual soccer game).

II. Game Design and Requirements

	As for the scope of this project, this game will be designed for a PC platform using a connected head mounted display and virtual reality controllers.  It will feature an executable application made with the Unity game engine on a Windows 10 platform (so it may not execute properly on a Mac).  Any further applications of this project (such as the arcade machine or multiplayer game) would be out of scope for this project; those are ideas in which I could take this project further.
	In the game, a single player will bounce a ball off of held platforms, aiming to hit bricks in a field of play to bounce the ball off of them to destroy them for points.  The player will not move: any movement they would do would be their movement within their physical space set up for virtual reality; the balls they bounce will return to their position in the virtual field of play.  The physics of this game will be fine-tuned so that they are consistent and predictable for the player to develop strategies to attain a high score.  The high score will be displayed at all times, either very close to the player’s eyes (as if they are wearing a helmet) or somewhere in the game but outside (and not affecting) the field of play.  Once a level is complete, the high score will be saved in a (assumed uneditable) file to keep track of it.
	The focus of the project will be fine-tuning the physics, getting the game set up as described above, and easily accessible.  If this is done, power-ups will be implemented, just like they are in later clones of Breakout: things like your platform being able to fire projectiles into bricks, a ball multiplier, a flaming ball that can hit multiple bricks simultaneously, and maybe more.  These power-ups will spawn from destroyed bricks and fall towards the player, which they will need to catch with their platforms (just like in later clones of Breakout).

III. Assessment and Evaluation

	As the sole contributor to this project, I, Quinn Owens, will be designing and implementing all of the components to this project.
	This project will be evaluated against a few factors.  (1) The project needs to be able to run on Windows 10 devices, at least.  This may change later to run on Mac IOS computers, if need be, but it will only be tested on a Windows 10 PC.  (2) The game needs to be complete, as per the design requirements referred to in part 2.  Required features that are missing or malfunctioning (such as the high score or the player’s interaction with the ball) should count against the evaluation of the project.  Power-ups should be considered in the evaluation, but only if they are implemented and break the required features.  (3) The physics of the game (specifically the ball) are going to be fine-tuned, so they should be considered in the evaluation of the project.
